MERN STACK OVERVIEW
--------------------
React: front end library, runs in browser
Node and Express: make backend api we interact w from front end
    express is a framework for node that lets us easily create apis
    handle authentication requests
Mongo: NoSQL database

HOW THEY INTERACT
1) frontend browser, react runs in the browser
2) send request from front end to backend. 
    an express app running in node.js environment
3) node and express interact with database to access/edit data
4) once node/express have response from database, send it to front end via json

SET UP GIT REPO
1) when i finished tut 1 i went to vs code's source control button on sidebar
    - initialize repo is same as git init in terminal, just creates git repo, no relation to github
    - instead i clicked publish to github which initializes repo and uploads to github


Tutorial 1: Express App Setup
------------------------------
Setting up an express app using node.js

SERVER.JS
the entry file for the backend app. where we register express app.
1) first install express package
2) require express package

PACKAGE.JSON
keep track of dependencies and register custom scripts.
- make by going to backend folder and npm init -y
- you can make scripts like dev so when you npm run dev it runs nodemon server.js

EXPRESS
- install package: npm install express
- you'll see node_modules folder where package+dependencies were installed

RUN A FILE
node server.js: but tedious since changes require saving and interrupting last run to ask to run again
nodemon server.js: detects changes and auto runs again, better

NODEMON
install: sudo npm install -g nodemon (this is temp solution, normally you'd just do it w/o sudo but i'll find permanent fix later)
- when you run nodemon you have to do it in the directory where server.js is

TERMINAL
run commands in background: [command here] &
interrupt command and return shell prompt: ctrl c

TESTING
- browser localhost:4000 see welcome to app msg
    reason: localhost:4000 [enter] sends get request to the server, who responds with json message

.ENV
for port numbers and sensistive info, we want it to remain invisible, so we usually store these in environment variables in the .env file
- when pushing to github, add .env to gitignore so it won't be pushed up, remains private
- to access environment variables, first npm install dotenv
    dotenv is a package that loads vars into process.env object
    - to use, must require the package in server.js

BROWSER
- typing a request in browser and clicking enter sends get requests. for post or delete reqs must instead use js on frontend OR could use Postman before we have that front end to try out the dif routes and requests

POSTMAN
helps simulate dif types of reqs to our server. helps test out routes we create for our api.

MIDDLEWARE
code run between request and response, like our app.get we have so far. 
- global middleware: 

SUMMARY
1. open new project
2. make backend folder inside
3. inside backend, create server.js
4. inside backend, create package.json (make scripts here to make life easier)
5. install express package (using npm. also before use npm must have node installed, which i already do)
6. require express package in server.js
7. start express app
8. listen for requests
9. tested it out by running (manually or nodemon)
10. react to requests
11. created environment vars by installing dotenv and creating .env file
12. require dotenv in server.js to begin using env vars
13. atp we used postman to test out requests
14. created some additional middle ware to help log reqs

Tutorial 2: Express Router and API Routes
------------------------------------------
set up routes or api endpoints for express api

PLANNING API ENDPOINTS
GET /workouts           gets all workout docs
POST /workouts          creates a new workout doc
GET /workouts:id        gets single workout doc
DELETE /workouts/:id    deletes single workout
PATCH /workouts/:id     updates single workout
- ids are route params

ROUTES FOLDER
we want to add routes cleanly. we could've added them straight to server.js tho.
> WORKOUTS.JS
    don't have access to app in here, so we use the express router

MIDDLEWARE
Middleware functions are functions that have access to the request object (req), the response object (res), and the next middleware function in the application’s request-response cycle. Typically added using .use() method
    - types of middleware
        global: apply to all routes
        built-in: provided by express for common tasks
        route-specific: for specific routes
        a route is global/route specific and built-in/not built-in
    - order
        matters! also, place global middleware before local ones
    - next
        global: if its custom, typically have to explicitly call next
        built-in: implicitly call next
        route-specific: we normally explicitly call it, but some can be implicitly called

SUMMARY
1. create routes folder in backend
2. create workouts.js in routes
3. in workout.js req express
4. create router
5. export router in the end
6. now in server.js require routes
7. add routing middleware
8. in workouts.js create all the routes' handlers
9. in servere.js add json parsing middleware
10. in Postman add all routes so we can use for testing


Tutorial 3: MongoDB Atlas and Mongoose
---------------------------------------
MONGODB ATLAS
online database?
1) create a database, free version, using aws and location of choice
2) go to network access and add ip addresses as needed
3) connect to application using native drivers
4) npm install mongodb
5) copy connection string
6) create env var mongo_uri with connection string

MONGOOSE
ODM (object data modelling) library. wraps mongodb with an extra layer that lets us use methods to r/w database docs + lets us declare models and schemas to ensure a more strict data structure. ex) schema for blog doc that says every blog must have a title, body, etc. if we tried to save a blog w/o those props, mongo wouldn't let us. mongodb alone doesn't have this feature. we're also gonna us mongoose to connect to the database inside the server.js.
1) npm install mongoose
2) in server.js require mongoose
3) connect to db in server.js
4) make sure to only start listening once connection to db is established

SUMMARY
1. set up mondoDB atlas
2. make env var mongo_uri
3. connect to db in server.js

Tutorial 4: Models and Schemas
-------------------------------
now we need to interact w db to add, retrieve, and update docs. we'll do that inside routehandler funcs.

MODELS
folder in backend
> WORKOUTMODEL.JS
    holds schema and models. schemas define structure of doc in db, model applies schema to a model and then uses model to interact with a collection of that name.

POST A WORKOUT
1) in workouts.js, require Workout model
2) in post route, parse data from req
3) create try/catch block
4) in try, create workout doc using Workout.create (since create asynch, make whole method asynch) and pass relevant props
5) send a response, which is workout doc
6) in error, send error message

POSTMAN
test post request by giving 3 params and receiving workout doc in response
1) go to post req
2) body>raw>json
3) write post req 
4) send shows you response

SUMMARY
1. create a models folder
2. inside it create workout model outlining schema and model
3. export model to workouts.js
4. workouts.js must require workout model
5. in workouts.js, fill out post route
6. test in postman various requests/responses
7. test in mongodb collections whether they're created accurately (error ones won't create)

Tutorial 5: Controllers (part 1)
---------------------------------
workouts.js is to register dif routes, but we don't want to bloat it.

CREATE FOLDER
controllers > workoutController.js
1) create a bunch of functions we can call in workout.js. 
2) export them at the bottom of file
3) import them in workouts.js, top of file
4) use workoutController methods in workouts.js

ERROR
today i tried running the requests in postman from home and faced an error. turns out I had to add my ip address in mongodb atlas and npm run dev again

SUMMARY
1. create controller folder
2. create workoutController.js within it
3. create methods inside it
4. export methods
5. in server.js, import those methods
6. use to make route handling easier
7. test out routes in postman

Tutorial 6: Controllers (part 2)
---------------------------------

PATCH
- when we send a patch request, we send data with our request which is what we want to update. for example, might send out a json obj with title and reps properties. 
- the way we get the properties that we send in the body is using req.body

SUMMARY
- we have all our controller functions
- we have all our routes which reference those controller functions
- we have our model for our workout documents
- and inside server.js we registered all of the routes to /api/workouts

So we've created our API and all of our endpoints

Tutorial 7: Making a React App
-------------------------------
SETUP
1) cd to parent directory
2) npx create-react-app frontend
    - frontend folder created + populated
    - KEEP app.js, index.css, and index.js
3) in index.js 
    - remove reportWebVitals import
    - remove reportWebVitals() method
4) in app.js 
    - get rid of imports
    - clear out most of app function so we can start anew
    - install react router dom package

TERMINAL
npm start: starts the development server

REACT ROUTER DOM PACKAGE
so we can add pages later
Install: cd frontend, npm install react-router-dom

CREATING PAGES
1) set up the router in app.js
2) create a pages folder in src folder to hold page elements you'll use in app.js
3) inside pages create home.js and inside it the Home element and export at bottom of file
4) in app.js import the Home element from home.js
5) test using npm start

NPM START
a script in our package.json file in our frontend folder. so, you call it from there.

SUMMARY
- created a react app
- created a home page
- added limited styling

Tutorial 8: Fetching Data
-------------------------

HOME PAGE
1) import useffect and usestate hooks from react in home.js
    - useEffect: fires a function when the component is rendered. to fire it only once when the component first renders, so the second arg is an empty dependency array
    - logic: we fetch workouts from the api. if all goes well, we change the state to reflect the json response from the backend.
2) return the workout titles
3) to test out, we need to get backend running
    1. open new terminal
    2. cd into backend
    3. npm run dev
    4. if you inspect page, you'll see errors because we're communicating between dif servers. port 4000 on backend and 3000 on frontend

ERROR (communicating between dif servers)
to fix this, 
1) go to frontend>package.json
2) add a proxy equal to the development server address (address of node server is 4000)
    - tells react dev server to proxy any reqs that it doesn't recognize to our api server at this address
    - to make this work, we also have to make our requests without explicitly declaring the port number in the request url
3) to test, must close and relaunch front end using npm start. also make sure backend is running. should be fine now, and our workouts in our db should pop up!

ERROR (capitalization)
in react, components must be capitalized to avoid confusion with html tags. by convention, we also capitalize the component's file names too.

SUMMARY
- created navbar component and imported in app.js
- created home.js to create home component and imported in app.js
- within home component used workoutdetails component aswell
- styled all 3
